# Megabase Thinking

In Alt-F4 number four, gamebuster800 briefly touched upon the idea of smelting ore at deposits, rather than in a centralized location. The reason for this is very straightforward and easy to grasp: ore stacks to fifty, and plates stack to 100. Therefore, when you ship a load of ore, you're only sending half as many items as when you ship a load of plates. At smaller scales, such as when your factory is starting out, this isn't that big of an issue, but when you start dealing with ore and plate counts in the tens of thousands per minute, it can make a big difference. Even with belts, it's more efficient to belt plate around than ore, but with trains, the difference can be overpowering.

As every experienced Factorio player will tell you, trains are the way to move large amounts of resources across long distances in the late game. Many players design rail systems that take two or even four trains in either direction, and much time and effort is spent in developing good junctions. But at the end of the day, the thing that matters most to a rail system is throughput. If you have fewer, shorter trains running, your rail system will always be more efficient than if you have more, longer trains running. Longer trains block intersections for longer, and the more trains you have running through the same area the more likely they are to get waiting in a jam. If you're anything like me, you design your rail network as your base grows: you might ogle over the nice intersections and city-block patterns on the subreddit, but at the end of the day your rails, like mine, are a mess. If that sounds at all like you, the number of trains running through your system is crucially important, and shipping plates quite literally _halves_ it.

Even if you're a designer, and your rail network never leaves trains waiting, you're still capped out at a maximum throughput of about thirty trains a minute per rail, and shipping plates instead of ore allows you to ship twice as many items in the same amount of trains. That halves your rail-building requirements, and it has another advantage as well: your smelting can be smaller and more compartmentalized, and less likely to take up large swathes of your main base and present a major logistical challenge. When I designed my first megabase, I centralized all smelting, and the number of trains I had to handle in a single location was excessive. Even running seven-trains, I would repeatedly have five or six stacking and waiting to unload, and I had continuous throughput problems as a result. I literally could not unload or maneuver trains fast enough to keep up with my base's demand for iron and copper, and so eventually I had to find an alternative solution. That solution was smelting plates in place: not only does shipping plates halve the number of trains in your network, it also doubles the amount of time a shipment lasts for, and reduces the amount of time your trains spend shunting.

Even if you already ship plates, there's more to megabase thinking. Suppose you see iron and copper sitting together, close enough that you would reach them with a single rail. Rather than ship down copper plates and iron plates in separate shipments, you can do a whole lot better and save a lot of space and effort by shipping something else instead: green circuits. Your factory uses them by the tens of thousands, and they go into almost everything you need to make. Nine times out of ten, your base is using more iron and copper for green circuits than just about anything, so why not take the load off of your main facilities and outsource it to somewhere where there's more space and less pollution? If you think about it, a single green circuit takes one and half copper and one iron to create, and they stack to 200 rather than 100 like the plates do. That means that in a single shipment of green circuits there are three loads of copper plates and two loads of iron - or six and four of ore. Why send ten trains when one will do? You shouldn't convert every outpost over this way - since you'll always need copper and iron for other things, and even iron ore in some cases for concrete - but in the case where you have iron and copper sitting together, why not save yourself some effort? Green circuits are hard enough to make in large throughputs anyway, but producing them in moderately-sized amounts is trivial. You can even use this to double or triple your green circuit production without needing to find or reclaim space.

The concept, of course, stretches to infinity. Red and green science can be made anywhere you have iron and copper, and engine units anywhere you just have iron. Plastic can be made in place anywhere you have oil and coal. Since you're shipping plastic and green circuits by train now, setting up a station nearby copper that makes red circuits is mere child's play, and then you have red circuits zipping around too. The key is to think of decentralized production as taking pressure off your main base: you don't have to fit things in anymore or cram them into tightly-optimized patterns when you can just spread out, and there's no need to ship things further than you have to. Dealing with biters isn't that big of a challenge: assuming you defend your mining drills already, adding a little area off to the side that's also defended is no big deal. At the same time, you'll notice your pollution decreasing: when it's not all centralized, it gets absorbed by more tiles and more trees and has time to dissipate. You'll want to set up radars to monitor these outposts, and I like to give them robots with repair packs also, but by the point in the game when you're setting up this kind of late-game production that should be no big deal. Smelting in place can be done earlier, of course, but I like to at least wait until I have laser turrets or robots to ensure my satellite locations don't run out of ammo.

At megabase scales, a lot of traditional thinking goes out the window. You don't always so much need a main bus as you do cleverly orchestrated production, and shipping things farther than necessary or less densely than necessary can really hurt your throughput. Over time, you'll learn to see patterns in the ores you look at on the map: iron and copper is red science, or electronic circuits, or ammunition; coal and oil can be plastic, or with copper a fantastic place to do red circuits. Shipping materials only short distances is a game changer, and it lets you design your base in a far more spread-out and equally organized manner. Rather than centralizing everything, decentralize: it'll save you time, effort, and the inanity of trying to find more space to cram things in.
