### Complexity Corner: The Mall <author>The Kool</author>

Welcome back once more to the Complexity Corner.  Today I'll be exploring a technique instead of a technology: the Mall.  As always with these articles, we'll be asking three questions: 'What is it?', 'What results can it give?', and 'Where should it be used?'

We've all experienced it by now, setting up something to craft manually and then drumming your fingers on the desk while you wait for it to finish.  Wouldn't it be so much nicer to walk over to a chest and have some waiting for you?  To just go shopping for your next project, instead of crafting by hand?  That's what the Mall is for.  Without even realizing it, you probably only think of automating things that have an automated end goal, such as ammo for your turrets or science for your labs.  The Mall is a place where you automate things that have a manual end goal - You.

talk some about how much time can be saved, throw a number in there...  building a new smelting line?  24 steel furnaces and associated inserters and belts, from raw materials

The Mall can (and should!) be used as early as you can in the game.  Your first instinct may be to automate red science to the lab, but I encourage you to first build a simple mall.  Have it build just gears and circuits at first, but soon upgrade it to making belts, inserters, and assembly machines.  Those three items and two ingredients will cover the majority of what you'll be making for the first stage of the game, and all you need to do is come back and add on when there's something new you'll be using a bunch of, like fast inserters or advanced circuits.

If you want to challenge yourself to use the mall religiously, then aim for the Lazy Bastard achievement.  The only way to get this is to make a bee-line for your first assembly machine, making as little by hand as possible, then automate the entire game from there.  Its good practice, though you'll find yourself automating things you wouldn't in a normal run.