## A public declaration of what we want Alt-F4 to be <author>Conor_</author>

Alt-F4 isn't reddit. It isn't the forum. It isn't a discord. It also isn't FFF. These might seem like obvious statements but they have been a helpful guiding light, pointing us towards the type of content and presentation style we want to have here. We want to be the place to go for polish story telling related to this game we love so much. These stories might be about the [UI design of an awesome Factorio mod](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-17/#interface-design-considerations-therenas), [a tale of exploring the harsh and unforgiving galaxy](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-14/#mod-spotlight-space-exploration-ironic-toblerone) or even just us [getting really nerdy with maths](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-11/#a-scientific-examination-of-the-factorio-world-pocarski), but they're all telling a story about what makes this game special for each of us. Each week we finish our releases with a call for contributions and I believe that looking at it, helps tell the story of what we want Alt-F4 to be.

> If you have something interesting in mind that you want to share with the community in a polished way, this is the place to do it. If you’re not too sure about it we’ll gladly help by discussing content ideas and structure questions.
- Therenas

I think this goes to show that contributing to Alt-F4 shouldn't feel like a chore or an obligation, we want it to be a collaborative process of us helping you to tell the story you want to tell, what it may be about. We regularly have long conversions in our discord (which you should totally join if you haven't), with contributors about where we think they should take their pieces. For me it's a case of, "I want more information about this really cool topic" and I always try to convey that enthusiasm in the hopes that we can inspire more creativity.

We also do our darndest to make the barrier of entry as low as possible, making sure that anyone and everyone who want's to contribute can. We'll take submissions in whatever form they come, good or bad grammar, short or long, in fancypants markdown, a text file or even handwritten! Everyone is welcome to contribute and I encourage all of you to think about if there's anything at all you want to write about, and if there is, come and chat with us about, we'll be happy to have you! I've personally never particularly enjoyed writing but writing for Alt-F4 in [release #15](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-15/), was great fun and I fully intend to write more in the future. For me, it makes it so much easier writing about something you are passionate about and I think we're all passionate about this silly little factory game.

## From zero to accidently helping run this thing <author>Conor_</author>

When I first heard about Alt-F4, I immediately loved the idea and knew I had to get involved. For context, at the time I had very little to do to, due to a/the pandemic and was desperate for a long term project to work on. I was searching high and low for anything that I could spend my time on when I found Alt-F4, I knew immediately it was the project for me. There was just the minor issue that I had no idea what I could contribute to the project.

Unfortunately at the beginning, it was quite unorganized (as most projects are in the early days) so I wasn’t particularly sure what to work on. I knew very little about the website setup itself so in true Factorio spirit I decided my best option was to try and automate something. With the help of lovely_santa, I created a few github actions to automate some basic tasks such as posting new github submissions to the discord as well as the creme de la creme of github actions, the automated release. This is the only action that's survived from that first wave and has been built on since then, allowing the posting to reddit and discord entirely automagically. It also allows me the opportunity to say “Starting automation” during each release, which makes me chuckle every time. I even managed to escaped the age old issue with automation, (see [xkcd #1319](https://xkcd.com/1319/)) which is always a positive.

After a few weeks of running Alt-F4 largely single handedly, the almighty Therenas recognized his limitations and decided he needed someone to help manage the discord and github so he could focus on editing and content. Ever since that day, I have had absolutely no idea what my role in Alt-F4 is but I've had a lot of fun doing it. I went from “Techie” to “Moderator” to “Technical Editor” with the final goal of one day reaching my full potential as ~~”Lord high overload of Alt-F4”~~ “Therenas’s personal manservant”. Part of this stems from the community around Alt-F4 constantly wanting to improve and innovate, causing regular shifts in what Alt-F4 actually is. Translation was a great example of this where a single person translating a single release has led to a large translation effort headed up by Firerazer, making Alt-F4 more accessible to as many people as possible.

I really love working on this project and I knew that neither myself, nor Therenas could run it single handedly. I’ve seen amazing community projects like this one peter out after a few weeks by relying too heavily on key people who couldn’t sustain their involvement levels. This led me to push to bring on more and more people, especially in the editing process. We are first and foremost a written publication and that means that content is always and should always be our number 1 priority. My first effort to improve the quality of Alt-F4 releases was to formalise the “content editing” phase for submissions. This is "talking about the submission" thing I mentioned earlier and I believe this is one of the most important parts of Alt-F4, so much so that we decided to bring *stringweasel*, Alt-F4’s most frequent contributor on board to help. Since coming aboard, he has worked amazingly well with the contributors to make the content as good as it can be. We also brought *Nanogamer* onboard to help with the accuracy after he repeatedly spotted issues during translations that all the editors missed. We chose to embody the “as many eyes as possible” philosophy with our editing process to make it as collaborative as possible.

## Making the best reading experience possible <author>Conor_</author>

When the website was first being built, it was essentially a race to build a working website in the few days between the first and second releases, ~~stealing from~~ *taking large chunks of inspiration from* the official Wube site. At the time, this was the best *Dr.Magpie* and *Y.Petremann* could do and of course it was amazing what they achieved in such a short amount of time. After those first few weeks of setup we're sorted, we switch to adding as many features as possible to allow us to make media rich releases, whilst hopefully making a pleasant user experience.

In those early days, we switch media hosting solutions three times, image embeds changed a couple times (only finally being unified a few weeks ago). The website stlying changed every few days and our logo, which was made by *Landmine752* and *Zirr*, was quickly incorporated into the design.

One of the things I pushed for from the start, was ensuring that the experience of reading Alt-F4 was just as good as mobile as it is on desktop, and this was no small task. *Duck(o)* took the lead, cutting margins, slashing padding and removing any and all frills to make the mobile experience the best it could be. *yay* took it upon himself to compress anything and everything he could get his hands on, reducing our page load times with all his might! The background in particular went from an 8 megabyte behemouth, to 1.5 MB to now only 500 KB. We also couldn't possibly fail to mention, our lord and savour spidertron sitting down there at the bottom of the page, skillfully brought to life by *xthexder* as mentioned in [Alt-F4 #12](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-12/#building-spidertron-for-the-web-xthexder). This is one of the coolest features of any website I've ever used and would not of been possible without the whole Techie team help xthexder pull it together.

#TODO
talk about:
* technical support for translations and localization hell
* Future stuff - MORE optimization
