## The Rocket Silo: Mysteries in Full <author>garr890354839</author>

Ah, the rocket silo. It is the largest in-game entity outside of the crashed spaceship. It is also one of the most expensive craftable entities. However, when its placed it has wierd effects on the electric grid, stranger still if modules are at play. We also mostly know that using productivity modules inside of it pays off. What about around the silo? All of that in this week's Alt-F4!

#### Power Usage

To start, lets look at its power usage.It claims it uses at most 4MW (which is true), but it only uses 0.25MW when just manufacturing rocket parts, or a bit more than 3 assembling machine 1s (0.225MW). When does it require 4MW, or a bit more than 51 assembling machine 1s? When the silo doors are moving, or a rocket is being pushed up. Those things must be heavy! It also uses an additional 10 kW idly when its nighttime, but there are presently no surface lights to indicate this. Back in 0.16, however, there were lights on the silo. Stranger still, when modules are applied they increase the energy usage of the silo by more than expected. 4 speed modules inside a silo should make the total energy usage of rocket part making to about 700kW, according to the mathematics behind it. But when observed, its closer to 960kW, or 2 beacons' worth of power. It does not mess with the aforementioned 4MW times like this, only this part. Speaking of modules and beacons...

#### Modules and the Silo

You can fit 12 beacons around 3x3 entities, and 16 around oil refineries. You can fit 20 around a silo. 2 beacons with 2 speed module 3s in each is the same as adding a second machine.
So one silo can do the work of 13 silos, side-by-side. When I mention costs, they are the relevant ores in vanilla without productivity modules in the crafting chain, and I am also using advanced oil processing. Each beacon costs 135 iron, 110 copper, 20 coal, and 411 oil which is quite a bit for an early-game player but nothing if tier 3 modules are automated (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?p=beacon*1&v=1). That's because any tier 3 module is 1,083 iron, 2,000 copper, 190 coal, and 4,129 crude oil (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?p=speed-module-3*1&v=1). While the calculator mentions speed modules specifically, the other modules are equivalent. So 4 tier 3 modules and 2 beacons costs 4,552 iron, 8,270 copper, 800 coal, and 17,334 crude oil (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?p=speed-module-3*4_beacon*2&v=1). That's a lot of raw materials. With certain optimizations, like those shown here https://factorio.com/blog/post/fff-351, its possible to get more out of your module, but the cost still stands. Normally, this cost greatly outmatches the machine. However, there is 1 exception to this rule, and that's the silo. The silo costs a whopping 12,220 iron, 8,600 copper, 437 coal, 11,080 crude oil and 1,000 stone (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?p=rocket-silo*1&v=1). So, its cheaper than making another silo to place down. Less spaghetti involved, too!

#### Productivity Bonus Interlude

When I say crafting operation, I refer to the main bar within the assembling-machine UI filling up to completion. For the sake of explanation, productivity is basically a multiplier on your output for your given input. The way this works is by taking 100 inputs and multiplying that by the percentage bonus from the modules within the machine. So, for example, take 4 productivity module 3s inside some copper cable assembling machine 3.
The total bonus from the modules is 40%, so 10 copper plates becomes 20*(1+0.4)=28 copper cables. We can calculate the required input for a given output by the reverse of the process. So if we wanted 140 copper cable made with the influence of 4 productivity module 3s, we first divide by the amount per craft (2) to obtain we need 70 crafting operations we need including those from productivity. Then we divide 70 by the productivity multiplier of 1.4, which will sort out the 20 free operations and leave us with 50 crafting operations.

#### The Rocket

The space rocket itself is the main reason why you place the silo down. Each rocket costs 49,100 iron, 92,500 copper, 9,500 coal, and 277,778 crude oil (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?p=rocket-part*100&v=1). This is added onto whatever you throw into the payload slot, but that can vary greatly depending on what you feed it. For most recipes, productivity modules pay off extremely slowly. For recipes involving a lot of raw materials, it pays off fast. Especially when used with the silo. 1 productivity module 3 in the silo itself drops the cost of each rocket to 10/11 or 90.91% of its original cost. Even a 9.09% drop of cost grants 4,463.6 iron, 8,409.1 copper, 863.6 coal, and 25,252.5 crude oil on average (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?z=eJwrcM7SMjQwUCtyLtDScqvzAkG1MmMAUBsG5Q__). That's a bit over 4 modules' worth of raw materials. What about all 4 modules being productivity module 3s? That yields a 28.57% drop of input needed. When applied to a rocket, that's 14,028 iron; 26,428 copper; 2,714 coal; and 79,365 crude oil saved by doing that, or just under 13 modules' worth of material saved (https://factoriolab.github.io/list?z=eJwrcA7UMjQxMLLQ0nJKUStyLtDScqsDQ7UyYwBzOAgo). In other words, its pays for itself three times over!