---
 author: Robynthedevil
---

### Mod Spotlight: [Spidertron Engineer](https://mods.factorio.com/mod/SpidertronEngineer)

A synthetic race of arthropod replicators plagues this galaxy. A single member of the silicon-based life can convert an entire planet's resources into grinding metal and searing heat, dedicated to one singular purpose: creating more.  The robots will slaughter the local flora and fauna wherever they inhabit, and methodically build further and further complex machinery and powerful weapons.  The process will continue without end until they are finally capable of launching uncountable numbers of their bastard clones to the stars; seeking out rich, unsuspecting planets.  The Spidertron is unfeeling, unneeding, and unyielding. They do not sleep, they do not show mercy. The factory must grow.

The storyline of Factorio as we all know it, is similar to many familiar base-building/survival games today: The Engineer crashes onto an unknown world and must survive until they can progress technologically enough to escape (read: shoot lots of rockets).  This is an engaging enough idea, and stays mostly on the edges of the mind as we engage in the core of the gameplay of Factorio.  Spidertron Engineer simply replaces The Engineer we all know and love with a cold spidertron robot from the very start of the game.  There are technologies along the way that upgrade your character(spider) and replace the armor upgrades from vanilla.  This relatively small scope of changes really gives the game a different feel.  With this mod, I find I am able to engage in the greater universe of the game way more readily. I know it won't be for everyone (especially arachnophobes) but for me, it takes a minimal part of the game and gives it a twist that ultimately makes the premise and endgame motivation very engaging.
