## The Origin <author>Therenas</author>

At some point, we got the news that the FFF [was ending](), and in the days following that, there was a lot of general sadness and some [discussion]() on keeping the format going. It didn't look like anything was actually materialising though, which is when I foolishly decided to take things into my own hands. I typed out the [first issue]() on Wednesday evening, the week after FFF 360. I also asked the [Factorio Discord]() for suggestions for a name (I'm terrible at naming things), and thankfully a great one was proposed: Alternative Friday Factorio Fan Facts, or Alt-F4 for short. Nice and clever while bearing resemblance to what it was mimicking.

Well I say mimicking, but the idea behind it has always been to follow a different model than the FFF, even if how that worked exactly still needed to be figured out. What also needed figuring out was a website and domain for the project. I tried to put something together, but I just couldn't in that short timespan, so the first issue was just 'released' as a Markdown file on Github. Good enough to get people's [attention]() at least though. I wanted to seamlessly follow the FFF, so it was crucial to me to not skip a week, even if that meant a rather shoddy presentation. I also threw together a Discord for people to have a place to gather.

On the day of release, it got quite quite a bit of attention, as people really did like the idea of the project. Thanks to Zirr for promoting it on the subreddit and Discord, quite a lot of people immediately took the initiative and offered help. Nicgarner offered his skills as proofreader (which he still does today!), and a small team of tech people formed to get a website up and running. Within a day, we had a working prototype, which was incredible. The enthusiasm from everyone was so great to see, and what was needed for the project to succeed.

I would never be able to run it all by myself, both on the content and on the technical side. It's just way too much effort, and it's not the point anyways. Alt-F4 was never intended to be my personal blog, but a platform for the community. All of this didn't stop me from wanting to shoulder all of it myself though at first. I tried to keep an eye on everything, giving my input and considering every single decision. This included the technical side, the editorial efforts, the community management on the Discord, and more. Within a week, I was feeling burnt out.

This was not a sustainable way to run the project, but I never did something like this before, and it was hard for me to let go of the oversight and responsibilities. How would I know that it was being done well if I didn't check it? Well, turns out you just need to trust the right people, and they'll do things you never would be able to. I started by bringing Conor_ on board as 'moderator' for the Discord, answering people's questions and writing instructions and so on. His responsibilities instantly started to include pretty much everything that I didn't get to. Our cooperation works out really well, because for some reason, we just agree on how to do things nine out of ten times. This makes things way easier, because he can just make decisions and it's very likely I'll agree with them, and vice-versa.

Conor_ really took all the small details off my mind, so I could focus on the bigger decisions regarding the direction of the project and the editorial side. The second responsibility I delegated was the technical side. I just forced myself to not look at all those discussions as they were happening, trusting the techies to make the right calls. Turns out, they did, and made better decisions than I would have made. I basically just popped in with requests for features, and not a day later, they'd be live on the website.

The next big thing that came up were translations. People were really enthusiastic about translating Alt-F4 into their language, and didn't shy away from the tremendous effort that it is. Soon, we had over two dozen translators for around 10 languages. Conor_ dutiyfully managed most of this, but he had enough on his plate as well by this point. So, we apporoached Firerazer, on of the French translators, and asking him whether he'd like to lead the translation effort. Turns out he did, and did a great job putting them together every week.

The most recent additions to our team are stringweasel and nanogamer7, who help me and nic shoulder the editorial effort. I initially thought I could handle that part myself (see the pattern there?), but I realized that if we wanted the content to be truly great, we needed people to give detailed feedback on their submissions to really improve them. I just didn't have the time to do that, I mostly concerned myself with improving the language used, not the contents. We also regularly had some incorrect facts in our pieces, which is just embarassing, so nanogamer7 took the role of fact-checker to make sure we're not spouting off nonesense.

All in all, every single person we brought on board by far exceeded my expectations, and the end product is so much better for it. The team that has assembled itself here is really great at what they do, and really great to work with. While this piece was about the core team with 'fixed' roles, I do want to mention all the contributors that submitted their writing as well, there were some amazingly interesting pieces in there, and I learned quite a bit about the game and community in the process. You are all very much appreciated.
