---
author: Therenas, Conor_, stringweasel
editor: nanogamer7, nicgarner, Firerazer
translator: alarig
image:
  url: /assets/ALTF4/19/thumbnail.jpg
  transcription: Le logo d’Alt-F4
title: "Alt-F4 #19 - Une retrospective"
lang: fr
discuss:
  discord: https://discord.gg/ceKebbY
  forum: https://forums.factorio.com/viewtopic.php?f=5&t=93836
  reddit: https://www.reddit.com/r/factorio/comments/koczt9/altf4_19_a_retrospective/
---

Cette semaine, en cette nouvelle années, nous avons voulu passer en revue le
projet *Therenas* démarré quatre mois et demi plus tôt afin de remplir le vide
que l’absence de FFF a laissé dans nos cœurs. Nous avons demandé aux personnes
impliquées dans le processus quelle était leur spécialité, leur faisant écrire
un peu d’histoire sur comment les choses ont évolué.

## L’origine <author>Therenas</author>

À un certain moment, nous avons appris que FFF [se
terminait](https://factorio.com/blog/post/fff-360), et dans les jours qui ont
suivi, il y eu beaucoup de déception ainsi que des
[discussions](https://www.reddit.com/r/factorio/comments/i9pxb3/communityfff/)
pour garder le format en place. Il n’y avait rien de vraiment concret
cependant, c’est pourquoi j’ai tout bêtement décidé de prendre les choses en
main. J’ai créé le [premier ticket](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-1/) le mercredi
soir, la semaine après FFF 360. J’ai aussi cherché des suggestions de nom sur
le [Discord de
Factorio](https://discord.com/channels/139677590393716737/603392474458882065/745706599871414434)
(je suis très mauvais en nommage), et par chance une bonne idée a été
proposée : Alternative Friday Factorio Fan Facts, ou Alt-F4 en abbrégé. Joli et
ingénieux, tout restant fidèle à ce que j’étais en train d’imiter.

{% include quote.html text='Alternative Factorio Friday Fan Facts, also known
as Alt F4' translation='Alternative Factorio Friday Fan Facts, plus communément
appelé Alt F4' author='ETG' %}

Bon, je dis imiter, mais l’idée derrière tout cela a toujours été de suivre un
modèle différent des FFF, même si le fonctionnement exact était encore à
découvrir. Un site web ainsi qu’un nom de domaine pour le projet étaient aussi
à trouver. J’ai essayé de monter quelque chose, mais c’était impossible en un
si petit laps de temps, donc la première itération était seulement un fichier
Markdown sur Github. C’était tout du moins suffisant pour attirer
[l’attention](https://www.reddit.com/r/factorio/comments/iduyjn/altf4_1_we_need_you/).
Je voulais suivre FFF sans rupture, il était donc crucial de ne pas rater une
semaine, même si ça voulait dire une présentation pour le moins bâclée.

Le jour de la publication, j’étais un peu au centre de l’attention, vu que les
gens ont vraiment aimé l’idée du projet. Merci à *Zirr* pour la promotion sur
le subreddit et Discord, vraiment beaucoup de gens ont immédiatement pris
l’initiative de proposer leur aide. *Nicgarner* a mis ses compétences de
relecteur a contribution (ce qu’il continue de faire aujourd’hui !), et une
petite équipe de techs s’est formée pour mettre le site web en place. Dans la
journée, nous avions un prototype fonctionnel, ce qui est incroyable.
L’enthousiasme général était vraiment fantastique, et était ce dont le projet
avait besoin pour réussir.

Je n’aurais jamais été capable de tout faire par moi-même, aussi bien sur
l’aspect technique que sur le contenu. C’est clairement trop d’effort, et ce
n’est pas le but de toutes façons. Alt-F4 n’a jamais été prévu pour être mon
blog personnel, mais une plateforme pour la communauté. Cependant, rien de tout
cela m’a empêché de vouloir le supporter totalement au début. J’ai essayé de
garder un œil partout, donner des conseils, et prendre part à la plus petite
décision. Ça incluait les questions techniques, le coté éditorial, la gestion
de la communauté sur le Discord, et plus encore. Au bout d’une semaine, je me
sentais épuisé.

This was not a sustainable way to run the project, but I never did something like this before, and it was hard for me to let go of the oversight and responsibilities. How would I know that it was being done well if I didn't check it? Well, turns out you just need to trust the right people, and they'll do things you never would be able to. I started by bringing *Conor_* on board as 'moderator' for the Discord, answering people's questions and writing instructions and so on. His responsibilities instantly shifted to include pretty much everything that I didn't get to. Our cooperation works out really well because, for some reason, we just agree on how to do things nine out of ten times. This makes things way easier because he can just make decisions and it's very likely I'll agree with them, and vice-versa.

*Conor_* really took all the small details off my mind, so I could focus on the bigger decisions regarding the direction of the project and the editorial side. The second responsibility I delegated was the technical side. I just forced myself to not look at all those discussions as they were happening, trusting the techies to make the right calls. Turns out they did, making better decisions than I would have. After that, I basically just popped in with requests for features, and a day or two later, they'd be live on the website.

The next big thing that came up were translations. People were really enthusiastic about translating Alt-F4 into their language and didn't shy away from the tremendous effort that it is. Soon, we had over two dozen translators for ten languages. *Conor_* dutifully managed most of this, but he had enough on his plate by this point. So, we approached *Firerazer*, one of the French translators, and asking him whether he'd like to lead the translation effort. Turns out he did and does a great job putting them together every week.

The most recent additions to our team are *stringweasel* and *nanogamer7*, who help me and *Nic* shoulder the editorial effort. I initially thought I could handle that part myself (see the pattern there?), but I realized that if we wanted the content to be truly great, we needed people to give detailed feedback on their submissions to really improve them. I just didn't have the time to do that, I mostly concerned myself with improving the language used, not the contents. We also regularly had some incorrect facts in our pieces, which is just embarrassing, so nanogamer7 took the role of fact-checker to make sure we're not spouting off any more nonsense than necessary.

All in all, every single person we brought onboard does a great job, and the end product is so much better for it. The team that has assembled itself here is really great at what they do and really great to work with. While this piece was about the core team with 'fixed' roles, I do want to mention all the contributors that submitted their writing as well, there were some amazingly interesting pieces in there, and I learned quite a bit about the game and community in the process. You are all very much appreciated.

## The First Few Weeks <author>Conor_</author>

When I first heard about Alt-F4 being started, I immediately loved the idea and knew I had to get involved. For context, at the time I had very little to do due to the pandemic, and I was desperate for a long-term project to work on. I was searching high and low for anything that I could spend my time on when I found Alt-F4, I knew immediately it was the project for me. There was just the minor issue that I had no idea what I could contribute to the project. For me, writing has always been a bit of a slog and I couldn’t think of any particularly good ideas for things to write about anyway so I threw my hat into the Techie ring.

Unfortunately at the beginning, it was quite unorganized (as most projects are in the early days) so I wasn’t particularly sure what to work on. I knew very little about the website setup itself, so in true Factorio spirit, I decided my best option was to try and automate something. With the help of *lovely_santa*, I created a few Github actions to automate some basic tasks such as posting new Github submissions to the Discord, as well as the crème de la crème of Github actions: the automated release. This is the only action that's survived from that first wave and has been improved since then, allowing the posting to Reddit and Discord entirely automagically. It also allows me the opportunity to say “Starting automation” during each release, which makes me chuckle every time. I even managed to escape the age-old issue with automation (see [xkcd #1319](https://xkcd.com/1319/)), which is always a positive.

After a few weeks of running Alt-F4 largely single-handedly, the almighty Therenas recognized his limitations and decided he needed someone to help manage the Discord and Github so he could focus on editing and content. Ever since that day, I have had absolutely no idea what my role in Alt-F4 is, but I've had a lot of fun doing it. I went from “Techie” to “Moderator” to “Technical Editor” with the final goal of one day reaching my full potential as ~~”Lord high overload of Alt-F4”~~ “Therenas’s personal manservant”. Part of this stems from the community around Alt-F4 constantly wanting to improve and innovate, causing regular shifts in what Alt-F4 actually is. Translation was a great example of this where a single person translating a single release has led to a large translation effort headed up by *Firerazer*, making Alt-F4 more accessible to as many people as possible.

I really love working on this project and I knew that neither myself nor Therenas could run it single-handedly. I’ve seen amazing community projects like this one peter out after a few weeks by relying too heavily on key people who couldn’t sustain their involvement levels. This led me to push to bring on more and more people, especially in the editing process. We are first and foremost a written publication and that means that content is always and should always be our number one priority. My first effort to improve the quality of Alt-F4 releases was to formalise the “content editing” phase for submissions. During this, we try our darndest to bring the best out of the contributors with focused feedback about what we want more of in the submission. I believe this is one of the most important parts of Alt-F4 which sets up apart from a simple Reddit post and I hope is the reason people keep coming back every week.

## A New Submission's Journey <author>stringweasel</author>

Alt-F4 would not be possible without the creative Factorio community continuously  submitting great articles that we can publish. Each of these submissions goes through quite a journey to reach your screens every Friday. What does that journey look like? And how hard is it to create a submission? Here I will give you a quick glimpse of what goes on behind the scenes, and what you might expect when submitting an article.

When you submit an article it will most likely arrive on my (*stringweasel*) doorstep first. This can be a simple text file or a Pull Request on our [Alt-F4 Github Repo](https://github.com/AlternativeFFFF/Alt-F4), because that is where it will ultimately end up. I'll read through it and see how it can fit into our structure and content. I'll give you some feedback on how it reads and where you could possibly expand. Next *nanogamer7* - our thorough fact-checker - will read through your submission. He will make sure there are no accidental factual mistakes, that all the links point where you expect them to point, etc. He's like your guardian angel and has saved my submissions from stupid mistakes a few times already. And don't worry, we ignore spelling and grammar initially to focus on the content.

{% include image.html src='https://media.alt-f4.blog/ALTF4/19/fact_checking_nano_blur.png' alt='Blurred screenshot of Nanogamer’s fact-checking format' caption='An example of Nanogamer’s thorough fact checking report on an article. (It’s pixelated because few will see the review - unless they go search through the repository)'%}

However, since it will be published online, someone needs to have a look at your grammar and spelling at some point. Here *Therenas*, our editor in chief, is the local expert. He will improve your sentence structures and spelling, and make you sound almost as smart as he is. He has detangled many of my terrible tongue twisters into smooth phrases without changing what I said. And if that's not enough, our other expert *nicgarner* will do a final review to make sure *Therenas* didn't miss anything. And after your piece is silky smooth, *Firerazer* and his capable team will take over. They will translate your article into a variety of different languages. This team deserves a lot of praise for all the rushed articles which they dedicatedly translated when there were last-minute changes. And remember, it will likely be the first time anything you wrote will be readable in more than three languages!

Finally, *Conor_* will do the fateful merge-to-master, after which it will disappear into the Git void. This final step is a mysterious and chaotic place, full of CSS and HTML (and spidertrons!), but it's a place that has been tamed *Conor_*, *Dr. MagPie*, and their tenacious techie team. Then at some point on Friday afternoon, like a butterfly emerges from its cocoon, it will emerge on our beautiful website to be enjoyed by all of you. This is usually the point where Klonan does his duty as Wube Community Manager and find some mistake in your article, which we will fix with a ninja-edit before anyone else notices.

Now you are a published author - or at least in our eyes. And you get to have the `Contributor` role on our [Discord server](https://discord.com/invite/ceKebbY), which comes with a nice orange colour. And we will hope that you might send us a submission again in the future!

## Contributing

This was the first part of our two-part retrospective, we hope you found some of this insight interesting or insightful. We had so much to talk about that it couldn't possibly fit into a single issue, so there'll be more talk about the translation process and some technical issues that came up next week! There'll also be some more touchy-feely stuff, so you can look forward to that.

As always, we’re looking for people that want to contribute to Alt-F4, be it by submitting an article or by helping with translation. If you have something interesting in mind that you want to share with the community in a polished way, this is the place to do it. If you’re not too sure about it we’ll gladly help by discussing content ideas and structure questions. If that sounds like something that’s up your alley, join the [Discord](https://discord.gg/nxnCFkb) to get started!
