---
author: gamebuster800, Landmine752, Romner
editor: Therenas, nicgarner
image:
  url: /assets/ALTF4/4/thumbnail.jpg
  transcription: Fanart of a cute engineer riding the new spidertron
title: "Alt-F4 #4 - ?"
lang: en
discuss:
  discord: https://discord.gg/ceKebbY
---

Welcome to the fourth issue of Alt-F4, rounding out the very first month of posts! This week, gamebuster800 goes through his process of designing a new blueprint for his factory, Landmine752 shares some of his favorite fan art, and Romner gives us some insight into his Realistic Fusion Power mod (which is part 1 of a two part series!).

Also, Alt-F4 is now available in 5 languages (English, Russian, Ukrainian, Italian and French) thanks to the effort of many dedicated translators that jumped in to help immediately. You guys are great, thank you. If you, dear reader, want to help translate it into even more languages, take a look at the contribute-section at the end.


## Contribute

Same story as every week: We'd love it if you contributed to Alt-F4, be it by submitting an article, or by helping with translation! If have something interesting in mind that you want to share with the community in a polished way, this is the place to do it. If you're not too sure about it, we'll gladly help with any content, structure and grammar questions. Join the [Discord](https://discord.gg/nxnCFkb) to get going.

We've also got translation going this week, which was met with a lot of enthusiasm by some of you that jumped in and helped immediately, which was great to see. If you want to translate Alt-F4 into your language, or help with a language that is already being translated, feel free to join the [Discord](https://discord.gg/ZpNzmN6) and read the #translation-instructions. Let's get this translated into even more languages, so everyone can enjoy it equally!
