---
author: Therenas, Conor_, stringweasel, Nanogamer7, Firerazer
editor: nicgarner
image:
  url: /assets/ALTF4/19/thumbnail.jpg
  transcription: The Alt-F4 Logo
title: "Alt-F4 #19 - Looking back"
lang: en
discuss:
  discord: https://discord.gg/ceKebbY
---

This week, in the new year, we wanted to take a look back at the project Therenas started four and a half months ago to fill the void that the absence of the FFF left in all our hearts. We asked the people involved in this process about their speciality, and to write down a bit of history of how this all evolved.

## Conclusion <author>Therenas</author>

So hopefully that was some interesting insight into the project, and how it evolved to what it is today. We're not done of course, we're planning to keep this going for as long as we enjoy putting it together and you enjoy reading it. To that end, I wanted to bring up that we need submissions from all of you to make this project work. All these processes are well and good, but it's our goal to give community members a platform to make their voice heard, and to present an interesting and enjoyable read to everyone. So if you got anything you're passionate about that people should hear, please join the [Discord](https://discord.gg/nxnCFkb) and share it with us.

I want to thank everyone that contributed to the project, you are all amazing. Be it the translators, who spend many hours putting together their translations in a collaborative way so that the content can be enjoyed by many more people around the world, reaching non-English speaking communities in ways the FFF did not. Be it the writers who come up with some great ideas to write about, incorporating feedback very well and just being the lifeblood of the project in genreal. Be it the techies, who jump at our every request to allow us to present the content in a nicer way, and making it all as accessible as possible to all readers. Be it the editorial staff that puts in the effort to give good feedback to writers, polishing the weekly articles as much as possible, and for putting up with my personal opinions on how things should be done.

Factorio has the nicest community I have ever been a part of, and the subset that gathered for Alt-F4 is even nicer, if such a thing is possible. I don't think I had a single negative interaction this entire time. Seeing as how much of a toxic wasteland some gaming communities are, I'm so grateful ours is the way it is. Thanks to everyone for being such nice people, it really makes all this a joy to work on, and makes it worth the effort.