---
author: Conor_, nanogamer7, Therenas
editor: stringweasel, nicgarner, Firerazer
image:
  url: /assets/ALTF4/20/thumbnail.jpg
  transcription: A 'group picture' of our 'staff'
title: "Alt-F4 #20 - Retrospective 2: Electric Boogaloo"
lang: en
discuss:
  discord: https://discord.gg/ceKebbY
---

Rounding out the first five months of issues, Alt-F4 #20 brings the second part of our retrospective and look behind the scenes. nanogamer7 takes us through how the translation process got started and what some of the problems are that came up. But before that, Conor_ presents us a sort of mission statement, which puts our thoughts on the project into a succinct form.

## A public declaration of what we want Alt-F4 to be <author>Conor_</author>

Alt-F4 isn't reddit. It isn't the forum. It isn't Discord. It also isn't the FFF. These might seem like obvious statements but they have been a helpful guiding light, pointing us towards the type of content and presentation style we want to achieve. We want to be the place to go for polished writing related to the game we love so much. These stories might be about the [UI design of an awesome Factorio mod](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-17/#interface-design-considerations-therenas), [a tale of exploring the harsh and unforgiving galaxy](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-14/#mod-spotlight-space-exploration-ironic-toblerone) or even just us [getting really nerdy with maths](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-11/#a-scientific-examination-of-the-factorio-world-pocarski), but they're all telling a story about what makes this game special for each of us. Each week we finish our releases with a call for contributions, and looking at that helps tell the story of what we want Alt-F4 to be:

{% include quote.html text='If you have something interesting in mind that you want to share with the community in a polished way, this is the place to do it. If you’re not too sure about it we’ll gladly help by discussing content ideas and structure questions.' author='Therenas' %}

It shows that contributing to Alt-F4 shouldn't feel like a chore or an obligation; We want it to be a collaborative process of us helping you to tell the story you want to tell, whatever it might be about. We regularly have long conversions in our [Discord](https://discord.gg/nxnCFkb) (which you should totally join if you haven't!) with contributors about where we think they should take their writing. When I personally give feedback, it's often a case of "I want more information about this really cool topic", while trying to convey enthusiasm in the hopes that I can inspire more creativity.

We also do our darndest to make the barrier of entry as low as possible, making sure that anyone and everyone who wants to contribute can do so. We'll take submissions in whatever form they come, good or great grammar, long or short, in fancy-pants markdown, a text file or even handwritten! Everyone is welcome to contribute and I encourage all of you to think about whether there's anything at all you want to write about, and if there is, come and chat with us about, we'll be happy to have you! I've personally never particularly enjoyed writing, but doing so for Alt-F4 in [release #15](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-15/) was great fun and I fully intend to write more in the future. For me, it makes it so much easier writing about something you are passionate about, and I think we're all passionate about this silly little factory game.

[ Nanogamer translation piece to go here ]

## Conclusion <author>Therenas</author>

So hopefully these last two issues contained some interesting insight into the project and how it evolved to what it is today. We're not done of course, we're planning to keep this going for as long as we enjoy putting it together and you enjoy reading it. To that end, I wanted to bring up that we need submissions from all of you to make this project work. All these processes are well and good, but it's our goal to give community members a platform to make their voice heard, and to present an interesting and enjoyable read to everyone. So if you got anything you're passionate about that people should hear, please join the [Discord](https://discord.gg/nxnCFkb) and share it with us.

I want to thank everyone that contributed to the project, you are all amazing. Be it the translators, who spend many hours putting together their translations in a collaborative way so that the content can be enjoyed by many more people around the world, reaching non-English speaking communities in ways the FFF did not. Be it the writers who come up with some great ideas to write about, incorporating feedback and just being the lifeblood of the project in general. Be it the techies, who jump at our every request to allow us to present the content in a nicer way, and making it all as accessible as possible to all readers. Be it the editorial staff that puts in the effort to give good feedback to writers, polishing the weekly articles as much as possible, and for putting up with my personal nitpicks on things.

Factorio has the nicest community I have ever been a part of, and the subset that gathered for Alt-F4 is even nicer, if such a thing is possible. I don't think I had a single negative interaction this entire time. Seeing as how much of a toxic wasteland some gaming communities are, I'm so grateful ours is the way it is. Thanks to everyone for being such nice people, it really makes all this a joy to work on, and makes it worth the effort.
