---
author: Conor_, pocarski, Therenas
editor: stringweasel, Nanogamer7, Firerazer
image:
  url: /assets/ALTF4/46/thumbnail.jpg
  transcription:
title: "Alt-F4 #46 - One Year And Counting"
lang: en
discuss:
  discord: https://alt-f4.blog/discord
---

Oh man. It really has been a year since I started this project. Can't quite believe it's already been a year, while also not quite believing the project carried on for a whole year. In the beginning, it was just a silly idea that I wanted to try out and see where it would go, not really expecting it to become an actual project with dozens of people regularly contributing. It would have likely faded after a few weeks without tons of people stepping up and contributing. But (at least in this reality) it didn't, which I'm very happy about and grateful for.

Conor_ will thank the core team below, but I want to say thanks to everyone that contributed to the project. You've all been such a joy to work with. Thanks to the people contributing articles for presenting your passion projects and being so receptive to feedback, without you guys there'd be no project at all. Thanks also to the translators for working tirelessly on the various translations so more people can enjoy the project, and for putting up with the occasionally chaotic release schedule. Finally, thanks to the techies (especially MagPie) for fulfilling our every request concerning the website.

[[ CONOR ARTICLE ]]

## Word Gear

After a year of all this, *stringweasel* thought it would be fun to do a bit of a comparison between Alt-F4 and the FFF. So, with *pocarski*'s help, we put together a ~~word~~ gear cloud, with one half dedicated to either project. There's not much to say about it, half the fun is trying to find funny expressions hiding inside the cloud, so have fun!

{% include image.html src='https://media.alt-f4.blog/ALTF4/46/wordcloud_small.jpg' alt='Split gear shaped word cloud' href='https://media.alt-f4.blog/ALTF4/46/wordcloud.jpg' %}

One interesting factoid that came out of this is that Alt-F4 contributors have already written over 100k words in only 45 issues, compared to the FFF which has 350k words over 366 issues. Turns out we've been quite busy!

## New Alt-F4 Server

As part of Alt-F4's anniversary celebration, we would like to announce our new Alt-F4 public server! This time we will be playing the new [Satisfactorio](https://mods.factorio.com/mod/Satisfactorio) mod. If you haven't heard of this new and amazing mod then you can read this great [article](https://alt-f4.blog/ALTF4-45/) by the author Niet, who will also be joining us on this quest!

To join the server simply search for *Alt-F4 Community Server - Satisfactorio* in Multiplayer; anyone is welcome to join. Help us build a larger turbo-motors factory than anyone before, and herd all the Lizard Doggos we can find!

## Contributing

As always, we’re looking for people that want to contribute to Alt-F4, be it by submitting an article or by helping with translation. If you have something interesting in mind that you want to share with the community in a polished way, this is the place to do it. If you’re not too sure about it we’ll gladly help by discussing content ideas and structure questions. If that sounds like something that’s up your alley, join the [Discord](https://alt-f4.blog/discord) to get started!
