### Complexity Corner: The Mall <author>The Kool</author>

Welcome back once more to the Complexity Corner.  Today I'll be exploring a technique instead of a technology: the Mall.  As always with these articles, we'll be asking three questions: 'What is it?', 'What results can it give?', and 'Where should it be used?'

What is this 'Mall' I keep hearing about?

We've all experienced it by now, setting up something to craft manually and then drumming your fingers on the desk while you wait for the mile-long queue to finish.  Wouldn't it be so much nicer to walk over to a chest and have some waiting for you?  To just go shopping for your next project, instead of crafting by hand?  That's what the Mall is for.  Without even realizing it, you probably only think of automating things that have an automated end goal, such as ammo for your turrets or science for your labs.  The Mall is a place where you automate things that have a manual end goal - You.

So what's the benefit?

A typical early-game smelting line consists of 24 stone furnaces if you're planning ahead to upgrade them.  In order to feed these furnaces, you need 48 inserters, 24 long-handed inserters, and ~100 belts.  If you carry around only raw materials like plates and craft these things as needed, that's 12s for the furnaces, 50s for the belts, and 93s for the inserters; a total of 2m 35s that you're waiting around before you can build that one furnace line.  Multiply that by every furnace line, every mining outpost, and every production line you build and you'll soon find you're spending more time standing around waiting than you are expanding your factory.  The mall makes that go away, building things for you while you build your factory.  [Image here of a stupidly long hand-crafting queue]

Reduced waiting time isn't the only benefit.  Having output chests for each of your items means you have a place to store extras you might need to take out of your inventory, and means you don't have to carry a lot around to begin with.  [image here of chest full of expensive thing | "Remember to limit your output chests"]  Having everything made for you means you don't need to carry around stacks of raw materials to hand craft things.  Not only does this mean that you have more free space in your inventory, it also means that if you die away from your base you aren't losing a lot of stuff if you can't recover your corpse.  [image here of corpse in the middle of a massive biter base]

Alright, when and where do I use it?

The Mall can (and should!) be used as early as you can in the game.  Your first instinct may be to automate red science to the lab, but I encourage you to first build a simple mall as soon as you have assembly machines.  Have it build just gears and circuits at first, but soon upgrade it to making belts, inserters, and assembly machines.  [Image here of a green science build | "If those ingredients sound familiar, you may have already designed a mall without realizing it."]  Those three items and two ingredients will cover the majority of what you'll be making for the first stage of the game, and all you need to do is come back and add on when there's something new you'll be using a bunch of, like fast inserters or advanced circuits.  Later, when you get access to more advanced technologies, building a production cell bot-based mall is incredibly easy, and combines intuitively with personal logistics and inventory management.

If you want to challenge yourself to use the mall religiously, then aim for the Lazy Bastard achievement.  The only way to get this is to make a bee-line for your first assembly machine, making as little by hand as possible, then automate the entire game from there, starting every new step at the mall.  Its good practice, as you'll find yourself automating things you wouldn't even think of in a normal run.